
=== PAGE 1 ===
ExpertSystemsWithApplications238(2024)121876
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Expert Systems With Applications
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/eswa
Flexible loss functions for binary classification in gradient-boosted decision
trees: An application to credit scoring
Jonah Mushava*, Michael Murray
School of Mathematics, Statistics and Computer Science, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Westville Campus, Private Bag X54001, Durban 4000, South Africa
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Keywords: This paper introduces new flexible loss functions for binary classification in Gradient-Boosted Decision Trees
Class imbalance (GBDT) that combine Dice-based and cross-entropy-based losses and offer link functions from either a general-
Machine learning ized extreme value (GEV) or exponentiated exponential logistic (EEL) distribution. Testing 27 different GBDT
Credit scoring
models using XGBoost on a Freddie Mac mortgage loan database showed that the choice of the loss function is
XGBoost
useful. Specifically, when the class imbalance ratio (IR) is less than 99, using a skewed GEV distribution-based
Freddie Mac
link function in XGBoost enhances discriminatory power and classification accuracy while retaining a simple
model structure, which is particularly important in credit scoring applications. In cases where class imbalances
are severe, typically between IRs of 99 and 200, we found that an advanced loss function, which is composed of a
symmetric hybrid loss function and a link derived from a positively skewed EEL distribution, outperforms other
XGBoost variants. Based on our findings, the accuracy improvements of these proposed extensions result in lower
misclassification costs, which are especially evident when IR is below 99, which results in higher profitability for
the business. Furthermore, the study highlights the transparency associated with GBDT, which is also an integral
component of financial applications. Researchers and practitioners can use these insights to create more accurate
and discriminative machine learning models, with possible extensions to other GBDT implementations and
machine learning techniques that take into account loss functions. The source code for the proposed approach is
publicly available at https://github.com/jm-ml/flexible-losses-for-binary-classification-with-GBDT.
1. Introduction Henkel, Onodera, Liu, & Erdem, 2020). Additionally, recent Women in
Data Science Datathon challenges have been won by ensembles domi-
Gradient boosting algorithms are popular in machine learning due to nated by XGBoost and LightGBM (Cohen, Dagan, Cohen-Inger, Ofer, &
their ability to achieve high predictive power and scalability to diverse Rokach, 2021). In the premier annual Knowledge Discovery in Data-
problems. In essence, gradient boosting involves constructing an bases competition held in 2022, LightGBM was among the top three
ensemble predictor by iteratively combining weak models (base winning solutions for classification tasks (Wu, Liu, Gazo, Bedrich, & Qu,
learners) greedily (Friedman, 2001). Among the popular base learners 2022; Zhang, Zheng, Yan, Li, Hu, Zhou, & Liu, 2022). These achieve-
are decision trees due to their simplicity and non-parametric nature. ments demonstrate the effectiveness of GBDT for classification tasks.
Gradient boosting with decision trees is known as Gradient-Boosted The use of GBDT in classification tasks is, however, restricted by the
Decision Trees (GBDT). GBDT has been implemented in several ways, use of a classic cross-entropy loss in conjunction with a logit link.
the most recent of which include XGBoost (T. Chen & Guestrin, 2016), Focussing on a binary 0/1 classification problem, the logit link function
LightGBM (Ke et al., 2017) and CatBoost (Dorogush, Ershov, & Gulin, first converts model predictions into a number between 0 and 1, before
2018). the cross-entropy loss quantifies how close the probabilistic predictions
Recent machine learning competitions focusing on classification are to the class label. There are several limitations associated with bi-
tasks have been won by ensembles that use GBDT. For instance, XGBoost nary class cross-entropy. These include bias towards the majority class in
alone won the Recommender Systems 2020 challenge, while a combi- class-imbalanced data (Jadon, 2020), inability to distinguish between
nation of XGBoost and deep neural networks won the 2021 challenge “easy-to-classify” and “hard-to-classify” cases (Lin, Goyal, Girshick, He,
(Deotte, Liu, Schifferer, & Titericz, 2021; Schifferer, Titericz, Deotte, & Doll´ar, 2017), and symmetric loss components for each class (Li,
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: 208525323@stu.ukzn.ac.za (J. Mushava), murraym@ukzn.ac.za (M. Murray).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2023.121876
Received 30 March 2023; Received in revised form 22 August 2023; Accepted 26 September 2023
Availableonline2October2023
0957-4174/©2023TheAuthor(s).PublishedbyElsevierLtd.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBYlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

=== PAGE 2 ===
J. Mushava and M. Murray E x p e r t S y s t e m s W i t h A p p l i c a t i o n s 238(2024)121876
Kamnitsas, & Glocker, 2019). A logit link also has a major limitation, XGBoost, which gives users the option to use either a weighted cross-
which is that it is symmetric around 0.5. This means that the probabil- entropy or a Focal loss in XGBoost. Trisanto, Rismawati, Mulya, and
ities approach 0 and 1 at the same rate (M.-H. Chen, Dey, & Shao, 1999). Kurniadi (2021) proposed a modified version of the Focal loss function
When one class is underrepresented, the logit becomes inappropriate that incorporates class weights for use in XGBoost. In our previous work
since the probabilities of the minority group will be underestimated (Mushava & Murray, 2022), we reported superior results by pairing a
(Calabrese, Marra, & Angela Osmetti, 2016). modified Focal loss with a link function based on the standard GEV
To improve the predictive power of GBDT in class-imbalanced data distribution in XGBoost.
settings, two generalizations are proposed in this study. We first adapt In the context of highly class-imbalanced data, selecting the right loss
the Unified Focal (UF) loss function by Yeung, Sala, Scho¨nlieb, and function is crucial to ensure that even the edge cases are taken into
Rundo (2022), to GBDT. The UF loss contains several loss functions account. One example of this is image segmentation problems, which are
designed for handling class-imbalance data learning as special cases, often associated with high-class imbalance. To address this issue,
thus eliminating the need to try multiple loss functions. Secondly, we specialized loss functions have been developed to train artificial neural
propose the use of flexible link functions that can be symmetric, posi- networks in computer vision applications (Jadon, 2020). Image seg-
tively or negatively skewed, depending on the classification problem. mentation involves assigning a label to every pixel in an image so that
We examine both link functions derived from a generalized extreme pixels with the same label share similar characteristics. For example, in
value distribution (Coles, Bawa, Trenner, & Dorazio, 2001; Kotz & medical image segmentation for oncology, the tumour is typically much
Nadarajah, 2000), as well as those derived from a new class of gener- smaller than its host organ, resulting in a high-class imbalance. Recently,
alized logistic distributions (Ghosh & Alzaatreh, 2018). The proposed Yeung et al. (2022) proposed a UF loss to handle class-imbalanced
changes aim to provide GBDT with more flexible loss functions, espe- medical image segmentation. The UF loss is a hybrid of generaliza-
cially for the handling of class imbalance data. tions of Dice and cross-entropy loss functions, which eliminates the need
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses to test multiple loss functions independently. The flexible loss function
related works and places the study in the context of the current litera- employed in this study is based on the UF loss.
ture. Section 3 provides an overview of XGBoost for binary classifica- Most researchers focus on customizing loss functions, but little
tion, which will be used as a reference implementation of GBDT. In attention has been paid to customizing the associated link function. In
Section 4, we unpack the loss-and-link function extensions that we are binomial regression, link functions are derived from the inverse cumu-
proposing. To gain a better understanding of the influence of class lative distribution function (c.d.f) of a random distribution, such as the
imbalance on our proposed extensions, a simulation study is performed logit, which corresponds to the inverse c.d.f of the standard logistic
in Section 5. We then apply our models to real-life data in Section 6. distribution (Prasetyo, Kuswanto, Iriawan, & Ulama, 2020). In this
Finally, Section 7 concludes the study. study, flexible link functions for GBDT are proposed that can be nega-
tively or positively skewed, or symmetrical with light or heavy tails.
2. Related works Specifically, we examine links derived from the generalized extreme
value (GEV) distribution and a new class of generalized logistic distri-
In the literature, there are three common approaches for modelling butions derived from the exponentiated exponential logistic (EEL) dis-
class imbalance in datasets: algorithmic modifications, data rebalancing, tribution. With the GEV distribution, based on extreme value theory, one
or a combination of both (Krawczyk, 2016). One leading approach to can fit the parameters that best explain the probability distribution of
algorithmic modification is to penalize the misclassification of minority extreme/rare events (Coles et al., 2001; Kotz & Nadarajah, 2000). On
cases, such as in Xia, Liu, and Liu (2017), Zhou, Yao, Wen, Wang, Zhou, the other hand, the EEL distribution is a new class of generalized logistic
He, and Liang (2017), or (Kim et al., 2019). On the other hand, data distribution proposed by Ghosh and Alzaatreh (2018). It is obtained by
rebalancing methods focus on oversampling the minority class to bal- mixing two distributions: the exponentiated exponential and the logistic
ance the dataset before training a model. Synthetic Minority Over- distribution using the technique proposed by Alzaatreh, Lee, and
sampling Technique (SMOTE) is a well-established data rebalancing Famoye (2013).
technique that generates artificial minority cases (Ferna´ndez, Garcia, GBDT implementations do not automatically calculate the partial
Herrera, & Chawla, 2018). In recent years, Generative Adversarial derivatives of the loss function, also known as gradient statistics, that are
Neural Networks (GANs) have gained prominence for their ability to required for the splitting rules in the decision tree. Consequently, con-
rebalance data by creating fake minority cases (Sampath, Maurtua, structing gradient statistics algebraically is a challenging task in
Aguilar Martin, & Gutierrez, 2021). adapting the UF loss to GBDT, either with a link function derived from
Batista, Bazzan, and Monard (2003) further proposed cleaning the the GEV or EEL distributions. To facilitate reusability and extensibility,
rebalanced data using undersampling techniques such as edited nearest we have published the gradient statistics on GitHub, which can be
neighbours (ENN) and Tomek links (TL). With ENN, cases whose class applied to other GDBT implementations such as CatBoost and LightGBM.
labels differ from the majority of their K-nearest neighbours (NN) are The main contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:
removed from the data. Comparatively, the TL method uses the 1-NN
rule to locate pairs of opposite-class labels that are closest to one • Adaptation of a hybrid UF loss function to XGBoost, which reduces
another and removes only instances belonging to the majority class. On the requirement for testing multiple loss functions,
the other hand, hybrid methods, such as balanced random forest (BRF) • Integration of GEV and EEL distribution-based link functions into the
(O’Brien & Ishwaran, 2019) and EasyEnsemble (Liu, Wu, & Zhou, 2008), UF loss to allow more flexibility in specifying the symmetry or
combine algorithmic and data rebalancing approaches by training en- asymmetry of the links,
sembles of CART (L Breiman, Friedman, Olshen, & Stone, 1984) and • The derivation and publication of algebraic gradient statistics
AdaBoost (Schapire, 1999), with re-balanced bootstrap samples. applicable to GBDT in general.
This study aims to implement algorithmic modifications to GDBT,
taking the XGBoost implementation as a starting point. XGBoost has also 3. Xgboost overview
been modified algorithmically in the following studies. Xia et al. (2017)
proposed using a cost-sensitive link function in XGBoost for credit The following is a brief overview of the XGBoost implementation of
scoring. The rationale for using this approach is that in credit scoring, it GBDT focusing on two class problems. Using strategies such as One-
is more costly to grant credit to a borrower who ends up defaulting than versus-All (OVA) or One-versus-One (OVO), most binary classification
the opportunity cost of rejecting a potentially good borrower. Wang, problems can be transformed into multi-class classification problems
Deng, and Wang (2020) presented a Python package called Imbalance- (Murphy, 2012, p. 503).
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
J. Mushava and M. Murray E x p e r t S y s t e m s W i t h A p p l i c a t i o n s 238(2024)121876
Let x i=(x1i,x2i⋯xpi)be a p-dimensional vector where xji denotes the into a left child node IL and right child nodes IR is
tpa ht rt eor ibi rb l e lu omt ae ,
n
o a (f pv t a oh r se i ia tf ibe vla eet u cy lr i ae w
s
sx i )lj l
i
f b no e r
a
s a ge t ig
v
i t ev o ne 1n
o
i uc f a tc cs a oe s mei. i
e
I w n
w
ao is nu o dr b ob s wi en ,r a v or e ty hd
e
c t rl oa
w
s d is e si effi a c yua
i
lt t wi oo ilnn
l
gain=( (cid:0) )1
2 ]H
jG ∈I2 j∈ +I λ+γ) (cid:0) [( (cid:0) 1
2H
jG ∈IL2 j∈I +L λ+γ) +( (cid:0) 1
2H
jG ∈IR2 j∈I +R
λ
be set to 0 (negative class). Consequently, a model development sample
with N cases takes the form:
S={
x
i,yi}
N i=1. Thesub-
+γ
scriptiisoccasionallydroppedwheneverthe context is clear.
[ ]
The XGBoost model is structured as follows: ⇒gain=1 G2 j∈IL + G2 j∈IR (cid:0) G2 j∈I (cid:0) γ (8)
̂y=∑T
f t(x) (1)
2 H j∈IL+λ H j∈IR+λ H j∈I+λ
t=1 XGBoost constructs each base learner tree by recursively partitioning
where ft denotes regression tree base learners that need to be trained
the data using split{ting rule (8}) until a pre-defined stopping rule. To find
sequentially over T rounds/iterations. The objective function that needs that variable xj∈ x1,x2⋯xp and its attribute that leads to the largest
to be minimized in each iteration is as follows: gain when used to split a node, XGBoost uses either an exact greedy
algorithm or an approximate algorithm (see T. Chen and Guestrin
∑N ( )
L(t)= l y i,̂y( it(cid:0)1)+f t(x i) +Ω(f t) (2) (2016) for further details).
i=1
where l(•)is a loss function and Ω(•)is a regularization term. At 4. Proposed flexible loss and link functions
each iteration t, the goal is to add ft(x i)to the current model ̂y(
i
t(cid:0)1) that
GBDT algorithms such as XGBoost rely on the following cross-
minimizes the loss compared to the true class yi for all training samples i.
entropy loss function for binary classification:
Simultaneously, to avoid over-fitting,
1 ∑N
Ω(f
t)=γL+1 2λ∑L
w2 j (3)
l(y i,̂y i)=(cid:0)
N
i=1{y iln̂p i+(1(cid:0) y i)ln(1(cid:0) ̂p i)} (9)
j=1
where ̂pi is the conversion of the model prediction (cid:0) ∞<̂yi<∞ to
Controls the complexity of the regression trees. This complexity can probability via the standard logistic link function:
be measured using L, which represents the number of leaves in the tree,
1
w w,
h
w ich hi c ah
re
r e rep are l-s ve an lt us
e
t dh e
p
aw rae migh ett
e
a rs ss
.
igned to each leaf, as well as γ and λ, ̂p i=p(y i=1|̂y i)=
1+e(cid:0)ˆyi
(10)
It can be shown using a second-order Taylor approximation and It can be shown that the gradient and hessian of the loss (9) with link
removing terms independent of ft that the objective function (2) can be (10) are gi=̂pi(cid:0) yi and hi = ̂pi(1(cid:0) ̂pi), respectively. This section pre-
simplified to: sents more flexible loss and link functions as well as the associated
∑N 1 gradient statistics.
L(t) ≅ g if t(x i)+ 2h if t2(x i)+Ω(f t) (4)
i=1
4.1. Flexible loss functions
where gi=∂l(y ∂̂i y,̂ ( iy t(cid:0)( it(cid:0) 1)1)) and hi=∂2l( ∂2y ̂i y,̂ ( iy t(cid:0)( it 1(cid:0) )1)) are the first and second-order
Loss functions are mathematical representations of the objective of a
partial derivatives of the loss function, respectively. training problem. Choosing the correct loss function is vital, especially
Letting Ij denote the number of cases that land in leaf j of ft, objective when dealing with highly imbalanced data, to ensure that all cases,
(4) can be re-written as a quadratic function of the leaf scores wj: including those at the edges, are considered. Using cross-entropy and
[( ) ( ) ] Dice-based losses, we will create a hybrid function, which is more
L̃(t) =∑L ∑ g i w j+1 2 ∑ h i+λ w2 j +γL (5) adaptable to the classification task at hand.
j=1 i∈Ij i∈Ij
4.1.1. Cross entropy-based loss function
It can be shown by differentiating equation (5) with respect to w and
The general form of the binary class cross-entropy-based loss func-
setting the result to 0 that the optimal leaf weights are:
tions is given by the following modified/weighted Focal loss function
∑
w* j = wh(cid:0) er∑
e
i G∈I
jji∈ h =I ijg + ∑i λ i∈= Ijgi(cid:0) anH djG + Hj jλ
=∑
i∈Ijhi. Therefore, gradient
statistics( 6 g)
i
(
l
mL Fin (y,
i
,G ̂yo i)ya =l, (cid:0)G N1irs ∑ ih =Ni 1c {k y,
i
αH 1e (,
1
&
(cid:0)
D
̂p
io )l γl 1´a lnr,
̂p
2 i+01 (7 1)
(cid:0) y i)̂pγ i1ln(1(cid:0) ̂p i)} (11)
and hi, also known as the gradient and hessian, respectively, are central where α∈R controls the class weights and ,γ∈R controls the degree
to the customisation of the loss functions. of down-weighting of the loss of the well-classified (i.e. “easy-to-clas-
Back-substituting (6) into (5) gives the optimal loss score for a tree sify”) cases. Cases are well-classified if the predicted probability of their
structure q as: assigned class label exceeds 0.5.
L̃(t) (q)= (cid:0) 1 2∑L HG +2 j λ+γT (7) SettT inh ge γb 1in =ar 0y ic nr o (s 1s 1 e ) n pt rr oo dp uy c( e9 s) ai s w th eie g hsp tee dci a bl i nc aa rs ye : cα ro1 s= s e1 n a trn od p yγ 1 w= hi0 le.
j=1 j setting α 1=1 gives the standard Focal loss function. Fig. 1 illustrates the
where the lowest value is sought. Therefore, the impurity for a single effect of the parameters α 1 and γ 1 by varying them in turn for the pos-
itive class, y =1.
node/leaf can be quantified using:
To avoid the suppression of the loss contribution of the minority
(cid:0) 1 G2 j +γ class, Li, Kamnitsas, and Glocker (2019) suggested removing the focal
2H j+λ parameter from the loss function component that relates to the minority
class. By doing so, equation (11) becomes asymmetric, thereby pro-
The gain (or reduction in the impurity) of parent node I after its split
longing minority cases at the decision boundary, viz
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
J. Mushava and M. Murray E x p e r t S y s t e m s W i t h A p p l i c a t i o n s 238(2024)121876
Fig. 1. Relative to the binary cross-entropy (black solid line): a) as γ 1>0 increases, the more the loss function focuses on “hard-to-classify” cases and b) when
α 1>1, the loss function assigns a higher penalty to the misclassification of the positive class and vice versa.
1 ∑N is the Tversky index associated with class k (Salehi, Erdogmus, &
l maF0(y i,̂y i)=(cid:0) N i=1{y iα 1(1(cid:0) ̂p i)ln̂p i+(1(cid:0) y i)̂pγ i1ln(1(cid:0) ̂p i)} (12) G
y
ikh (o 1li (cid:0)po ̂pu ikr ), a2 r0 e1 7 fa) l.
s
eIn
n
t eh ge
a
tT ivv ee sr s (k Fy
N
i )n
,
d ae nx d, (y 1ik (cid:0)̂pik
y
ia kr )e
̂p
ikt r au re
e
p fao ls si eti v pe os
s
i( tT ivP e) s,
As a further experiment, we will use an asymmetric loss function to (FP). Therefore (15) does not take into account true negatives (TN):
remove well-classified minorities from the decision boundary, so that (1(cid:0) y ik)(1(cid:0) ̂pik). LFT is asymmetric by design TI=0 when y
ik
=0. Dice-
the model focuses on hard-to-classify minority cases, viz based loss functions are beneficial because they allow for focusing on
1 ∑N one particular class during the model training process.
l maF1(y i,̂y i)=(cid:0)
N
{y iα 1(1(cid:0) ̂p i)γ1ln̂p i+(1(cid:0) y i)̂p iln(1(cid:0) ̂p i)} (13) Setting γ 2=1 gives the classical Tversky loss function and adding
i=1 α 2=β=0.5 simplifies it to the Dice loss function, i.e.
2TP
4.1.2. Dice-based loss function Dice= (16)
2TP+FP+FN
The general form of the Dice-based loss function is given by the
following Focal Tversky loss function (Abraham & Khan, 2019) Fig. 2 illustrates the effect of the parameters γ 2, α 2 and β on the Focal
L FT = ∑ (1(cid:0) TI k)γ1 2 (14) Tversky loss function by varying them in turn.
k∈{0,1}
4.1.3. Hybrid loss function
where γ ∈R is a focal parameter and The hybrid loss function combines the cross-entropy and Dice-based
2
∑ losses as follows:
N y ̂p
TI k=∑ N y ̂p +α ∑ N y (i 1=1 (cid:0)ik ̂pik )+β∑ N (1(cid:0) y )̂p (15) L UF=πL F+(1(cid:0) π)L FT (17)
i=1 ik ik 2 i=1 ik ik i=1 ik ik
Fig. 2. Relative to the dice loss (black solid line): a) when 0<γ 2<1, the loss function focuses more on hard-to-classify cases, whereas when γ 2>1 it enhances the
loss of easy-to-classify cases, and b) setting β>α 2 assigns more penalty to false negatives and is useful when there is a high level of class imbalance.
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
J. Mushava and M. Murray E x p e r t S y s t e m s W i t h A p p l i c a t i o n s 238(2024)121876
{ }
funcw tih oe nr e
v
eL rF si∈ onsl m inF, (lm 1a 1F )0 -, (l 1m 3aF )1
,
LFd Te tn ho et e Fs
o
ca an ly
T
vch ero si kc ye lo of
s
st h (1e
4
)F ,o ac na dl l 0os ≤s ⎧ ⎪⎨( 1+τ( ̂y(cid:0)
σ
μ)) (cid:0)1 τ,τ∕=0
π th≤
at
1 td he et e hrm ypin ere ps at rh ae
m
r ee tl ea rti v se
e
tw e oi fg h tt
h
o ef t hh ye
b
c ro idm p loo sn se n ft
u
nlo cs ts ie os n. It
is
f o Φllo =ws t(̂y)= ⎪⎩ e(cid:0)(
ˆy(cid:0)
σμ)
,τ=0
(24)
{α 1,α 2,γ 1,γ 2,β,π}.
Yeung et al. (2022) proposed a so-called UF loss function for se- Nested within the GEV distribution are three types of extreme value
mantic segmentation that combines functionally equivalent hyper- distributions. The type I case is the Gumbel family of distributions given
parameters in a hybrid of the Focal loss and the Focal Tversky. A by the parameterization τ→0. The type II (F`echet family) and type III
hyperparameter is a parameter that must be specified before the model (Weibull family) classes of the extreme value distribution correspond to
can be trained. Firstly, the UF loss function replaces hyperparameters α 1, τ>0 and τ<0, respectively.
α 2 and β with a common hyperparameter δ such that α 1=δ in Focal loss We propose using the standard GEV distribution (μ=0 and σ =1)
function (11), and that the Tversky index (15) be formulated as with τ∕=0 to get the c.d.f. of (23) as
∑ (cid:0) )
TI* k=∑
N y ̂p
+δ∑
N y
(1(cid:0)N i= ̂p1y i )k̂p +ik
(1(cid:0)
δ)∑
N (1(cid:0) y )̂p
(18) F GEV(x)=e (cid:0)[1+τˆy](cid:0)1τ (25)
i=1 ik ik i=1 ik ik i=1 ik ik Fig. 3 demonstrates the impact of the shape parameter τ on the p.d.f
Secondly, Yeung et al. (2022) reformulated (14) to and c.d.f of the standard GEV distribution.
∑(cid:0) )
L FT =
k∈{0,1}
1(cid:0) TI* k γ2 (19) a stD ane dn ao rti dn g G Eth Ve dp ir so tb ria bb ui tli is ot nic a p sr e pd GEic Vt ,i o thn es b qa us ae nd t io ln e t fh ue n cli tn iok n d oer f iv the ed sfr tao nm -
dard GEV distribution is
so that a common focal hyperparameter can be used in both the
cross-entropy and Diced-based losses (i.e. γ 1 =γ 2 =γ). In this way, the F(cid:0) GE1 V(p)=((cid:0) lnp GE τV)(cid:0)τ(cid:0) 1 (26)
UF loss function uses only three hyperparameters; δ to control the
weight of the two classes, γ the focal parameter, and π to determine the Mapping (26) to ̂y and solving for pGEV gives:
weight of the component loss functions. (cid:0) )
This study will also utilize the Tversky index (18), but with a loss p GEV =e
(cid:0)[1+τˆy](cid:0)1τ
(27)
formulation (14) and allow the other hyperparameter to vary for greater
flexibility. Therefore, our UF loss optimizes five hyperparameters: Φ* = 4.2.2. EEL distribution-based link function
{α 1,δ,γ 1,γ 2,π}. Hereafter, UF is the hybrid loss with (11), while UF0 Suppose the predictions ̂y in (1) follow an exponentiated-exponential
and UF1 are the hybrid losses with (12) and (13), respectively. logistic (EEL) distribution with a parameter set {β,λ,μ,σ}, where β,λ>
0 are shape parameters, μ∈R is a location parameter and σ>0 is a scale
4.2. Flexible link functions parameter. The probability density function (p.d.f) of ̂y is given by
( )
( )
In binomial regression, the probability p=p(y=1)is mapped to the βλe ˆy(cid:0) σμ ( ( ˆy(cid:0)μ ) (cid:0)λ) β(cid:0)1
response outcome (cid:0) ∞<h(x) <∞ via a link function F(cid:0)1 as follows: f EEL(̂y)= ( ( ) ) 1(cid:0) 1+e σ (28)
ˆy(cid:0)μ λ+1
F(cid:0)1(p)=h(x)
(20)
σ 1+e σ
where F(cid:0)1 is the inverse cumulative density function (c.d.f) of a The p.d.f. in (28) has the following special cases: β=λ=1 which
random variable X. The link function F(cid:0)1 is also known as the quantile leads to the logistic distribution, λ=1 which gives the Type I logistic
function. For example, the logit link is derived from the c.d.f of the distribution and β=1 which yields the Type II logistic distribution.
st (cid:0)andard )logistic distribution, F(p) = 1+1 e(cid:0)p. Using the fact that We propose using the standard EEL distribution (μ=0 and σ =1) to
F F(cid:0)1(p) =p and solving for F(cid:0)1(p): generate the c.d.f
Logit:F(cid:0)1(p)=ln(
p
)
(21)
F
EEL(x)=(
1(cid:0)
(1+eˆy)(cid:0)λ) β
(29)
1(cid:0) p
Fig. 4 demonstrates the impact of the shape parameters β,λ on the p.
In the context of XGBoost, h(x)=̂y in (1). Therefore (10) comes from d.f and c.d.f of the standard EEL distribution.
the mapping Denoting the probabilistic predictions based on the link derived from
( )
p 1 a standard EEL distribution as pEEL, the quantile function of the standard
ln 1(cid:0) p =̂yp= 1+e(cid:0)ˆyi (22) EEL distribution is
( ( ) )
(cid:0)1
genT erh ae l is za em d e e xa tp rp er mo ea c vh a li us eu s (Ged E Vin ) t ah nis d s ee xc pti oo nn e t no t id ae ter div ee x l pin ok ns e b na tis ae ld l oo gn i st th ie c F(cid:0) EE1 L(p)=ln 1(cid:0) 1+p1 β ELL λ (30)
(EEL) distributions.
Mapping (30) to ̂y and solving for pEEL gives:
( )
4.2. S1 u. pG poE sV e d this etr i pb ru et dio in c- tb ioa nse sd ̂y l in ink (f 1un ) c ft oio lln o w a GEV distribution with a p EEL= 1(cid:0) (1+eˆy)(cid:0)λ β (31)
parameter set {τ,μ,σ}, where τ∈R is a shape parameter, μ∈R is a
location parameter and σ>0 is a scale parameter.The probability
density function (p.d.f) of ̂y is given by: 4.3. Derivation of gradient statistics
1
f GEV(̂y)= σt(̂y)τ+1e(cid:0)t(ˆy) (23) The derivation of gradient statistics is a non-trivial step in imple-
menting the extensions proposed in this study. This paper is accompa-
where nied by a supplementary document providing an algebraic derivation of
gradient statistics. Furthermore, we have coded the gradient statistics in
Python and published them on GitHub, complete with implementation
examples. These gradient statistics can be used for other GBDT
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
J. Mushava and M. Murray E x p e r t S y s t e m s W i t h A p p l i c a t i o n s 238(2024)121876
Fig. 3. a) the black line represents the type i standard gev distribution (τ→0), which has an unlimited domain and positive skewness. When τ>0 (type II GEV
distribution), the p.d.f has negative skewness and a lower limit (cid:0) 1 τ exists on the domain. When τ<0 (type III GEV distribution), the p.d.f has positive skewness and
an upper limit (cid:0) 1 τ exist on the domain. b) When τ<0 the response output of the c.d.f approaches one at a faster rate than it approaches zero and vice versa.
Fig. 4. a) when β =λ, the p.d.f. of the EEL is symmetrical with β=λ=1 (black solid line) representing the standard logistic distribution. Compared to the standard
logistic distribution, when β=λ<1 (green dashed line) the tails are heavier and when β=λ>1 (red dashed line) the tails become lighter. The standard EEL has
positive skewness when β>λ (dark-blue dashed line) and negative skewness when β<λ (light-blue dashed line). b) When the p.d.f. is symmetric, the c.d.f. will also
be symmetric, and vice versa. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
implementations, including LightGBM and CatBoost, which support class imbalance in the Freddie Mac (FM) 60 data from our earlier study
custom loss functions. (Mushava & Murray, 2022). There is also a public version of the dataset
available on Mendeley Data (Mushava, 2023). The FM60 dataset com-
5. Simulation study prises 649,608 home loans, all with credit scores under 754. Among
these, 18,463 defaulted within 60 months after the loan issue date.
The study proposes a hybrid loss that uses five hyperparameters, There are 78 predictor variables in the dataset, recorded at the time of
either a standard GEV (one hyperparameter) or EEL (two hyper- loan issuance, and a binary 0/1 target variable, where 1 indicates a
parameters) distribution-based link while maintaining all baseline default within the 5-year outcome window.
GBDT implementation hyperparameters. In this section, we conduct a A stratified random sampling method was used to create mid-sized
simulation study to provide insight into the influence of hyper- datasets of 50 000 loans with different combinations of non-default
parameters on the predictive power of a model. In Table 1, we present and default cases. If we are simulating a dataset with a 1% default
seven important XGBoost hyperparameters as well as eight new ones rate, we will randomly select 49500 non-default and 500 default cases
introduced in the current study. Using sequential model-based optimi- from the FM60 dataset. In this instance, the imbalance ratio (IR) is 99
zation (SMBO), also known as Bayesian optimization (BO), we will (ratio of non-defaulting to defaulting cases).
optimize hyperparameters in the search spaces shown in Table 1. Noting that one only needs a single feature in the data to determine
how difficult it is to classify a given dataset, we calculate the highest
information value (IV) in the dataset. The convention is that (Siddiqi,
5.1. Data simulation
2012):
A total of 10 artificial datasets are generated by varying the degree of
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
J. Mushava and M. Murray E x p e r t S y s t e m s W i t h A p p l i c a t i o n s 238(2024)121876
Table 1 • Safe: if at least 4 out of its 5 nearest neighbours belong to the same
Search space for hyperparameter optimization. class label.
Hyper-parameter Description Type Search • Borderline: if 2–3 out of its 5 nearest neighbours belong to the same
space* class label.
• Rare: if only 1 out of its 5 nearest neighbours belongs to the same
XGBoost:
max_depth Maximum depth of a tree. integer [2,6] class label.
min_child_weight Minimum sum of case weights integer [1,10] • Outlier: if all the 5 nearest neighbours belong to the opposite class.
(or Hessians) in a tree leaf.
subsample The fraction of cases randomly decimal [0.5,0.8]
Fig. 5 summarises the complexity of the data points for the positive
sampled for growing a tree.
colsample_bytree Fraction of predictors to decimal [0.5,1] (y =1) and negative (y =0) cases. The pattern in Fig. 5 resembles that
randomly consider for tree observed across various 14 real-life datasets in the experiment by V.
building. García et al. (2019). That is, a high IR is associated with the positive class
eta The learning rate to shrink node decimal [0,1] being outliers/rare data points. Simultaneously, when the IR is high, the
weights for conservatism.
negative class consists mostly of safe data points. The percentage of safe
scale_pos_weight Controls the balance of positive integer [1, IR]
and negative class weights and borderline data points increases for the positive samples as IR de-
Gamma Minimum gain threshold for a decimal [0,10] creases, in line with the results of the experiment by V. Garca, Marqu´es,
split to be made. and Sanchez (2019). For the negative class, however, as the sample
Extras:
becomes more balanced, the safe data points decrease and the number of
Alpha (α 1) Class weights in the cross- decimal [1, IR]
entropy-based loss. borderline, rare and outlier data points increases. The simulated datasets
Delta (δ) Class weights in the Dice-based decimal [0,1] are therefore representative of real-life data under different levels of
loss. class imbalance.
Gamma1 (γ 1) Focal parameter in the cross- decimal [0,5]
entropy-based loss.
Gamma2 (γ 2) Focal parameter in the Dice- decimal (0,5]
5.3. Hyperparameter optimisation
based loss.
Pi (π) Weight of cross-entropy and decimal [0,1]
Dice-based losses in the hybrid. For each sample in Table 2, a random sample of 30 000 cases will be
Tau (τ) Tail parameter in the GEV decimal [-1,0) used for model training, 10 000 for model validation (i.e. determining
distribution-based link
optimal hyperparameters), and the remaining 10 000 for model testing
Beta (β) Shape parameter in the EEL decimal (0,5]
(i.e. evaluating the final model). The H measure is used to evaluate
distribution-based link
Lambda (λ) Shape parameter in the EEL decimal (0,5] model performance (Hand & Anagnostopoulos, 2014; Hand, 2009). It is
distribution-based link a coherent alternative to the widely used AUC for evaluating the
Loss symmetry The symmetry of the hybrid loss categorical {UF, UF1, discriminatory power of models.
function UF0}
We will utilize sequential model-based optimization (SMBO), also
*A uniform distribution is used to generate random values within the search known as Bayesian optimization (BO) to determine the optimal combi-
space of continuous hyperparameters. nation of hyperparameters. This technique is superior to other methods
such as grid search, especially when an array of hyperparameters is
• IV less than 0.02: no predictive variable present (Bergstra, Komer, Eliasmith, Yamins, & Cox, 2015; Snoek, Lar-
• IV between 0.02 and 0.1: weak variable ochelle, & Adams, 2012; Xia, Liu, Li, & Liu, 2017). The hyperopt module
• IV between 0.1 and 0.3: average variable in Python will be used to implement BO using the Tree-of-Parzen-
• IV between 0.3 and 0.5: strong variable Estimators (TPE) approach, as recommended by Bergstra et al. (2015).
• IV greater than 0.5: over-predictive. For a given candidate hyperparameter set, model training stops when
the H values do not improve on the validation sample in the next 10
Table 2 presents a summary of ten datasets that were simulated. iterations. Once the optimal number of iterations has been determined,
the hyperparameter configuration is used to score the test sample and
the H measure is recorded. The BO algorithm will use the performance
5.2. Data complexity recorded in previous iterations to determine the next combinations of
hyperparameters to consider in the next iteration.
To further understand each sample’s intrinsic characteristics, we Using’s heuristics by Owen (2021), we set the BO algorithm to take
apply the approach of García, Marqu´es, and Sa´nchez (2019). Specif- 10 loops in the search space for each continuous hyperparameter and 15
ically, using the k-nearest neighbour algorithm (with k = 5), each case loops for each categorical hyperparameter, for faster computation.
in the sample is assigned to the following groupings: Suppose the BO algorithm is run to search either UF, UF0, or UF1 losses,
Table 2
A summary of the simulated samples with varying IRs. There are only a few variables that have average to strong predictive power.
Dataset #Cases #Covariates #Predictive variables1 IV2 Default Rate IR
Sample 1 50,000 78 10 23.32% 0.0625% 1599
Sample 2 50,000 78 13 30.10% 0.125% 799
Sample 3 50,000 78 11 24.89% 0.25% 399
Sample 4 50,000 78 11 23.00% 0.5% 199
Sample 5 50,000 78 9 38.41% 1% 99
Sample 6 50,000 78 11 35.89% 2.5% 39
Sample 7 50,000 78 11 33.18% 5% 19
Sample 8 50,000 78 10 35.06% 10% 9
Sample 9 50,000 78 10 35.14% 20% 4
Sample 10 50,000 78 10 36.94% 30.% 2
1 IV>=0.02.
2Highest information value.
7

=== PAGE 8 ===
J. Mushava and M. Murray E x p e r t S y s t e m s W i t h A p p l i c a t i o n s 238(2024)121876
Fig. 5. Percentage of each data point type (left y-axis) and the class imbalance ratio (right y-axis) for each of the simulated samples. a) There is an association
between a high-class imbalance level and default cases being outliers. When samples become more balanced, outlier default cases decrease, while rare, borderline,
and safe cases increase. b) Most non-default cases are safe, but borderlines appear as the sample becomes more balanced.
each with 12 hyperparameters (7 unique to XGBoost, 5 from the hybrid The IR and learning rate are the most influential factors in the
loss), and using an EEL link (2 hyperparameters). In this case, the total discriminatory power of the custom XGBoost. An examination of one of
number of iterations for the loss symmetry and the continuous hyper- the component regression trees shown in Fig. 6(a) indicates an IR of 98 is
parameters will be (3×15)+(14×10) =185. the most important factor in separating the data. These results are
Using different combinations of training, validation, and test samples consistent with earlier studies that have highlighted the challenges of
in Table 2, the process is repeated five times. dealing with classification tasks where a minority class represents less
than 1% of the samples, as reported by Yang and Wu (2006). Accord-
ingly, when the IR is 99 or more (e.g., Samples 5–10 in Table 2), we will
5.4. Results refer to it as a severe class imbalance, otherwise as a non-severe class
imbalance. A supplementary document is provided that analyzes how
This simulation study aims to gain insight into the influence of the final hyperparameters, grouped by IR severity, were selected.
hyperparameters on the predictive power of the customized XGBoost
model. Therefore, for each loop of the BO algorithm, the following in- 6. Application
formation was recorded: the dataset’s IR, five hyperparameters from the
hybrid loss, seven hyperparameters from vanilla XGBoost, a binary in- In addition to applying the hybrid losses UF, UF0, and UF1, we
dicator for the type of link function (GEV =1), three binary indicators explore the four special cases of the loss in (11): cross-entropy (CE), CE
for the skewness of the link (negative, positive, or symmetric), three incorporating class weights (wCE), CE with a focal parameter (fCE), and
binary indicators for the symmetry of the cross-entropy-based loss (UF, CE combined with both class-weights and focal parameter (mfCE). The 7
UF0, and UF1), and the H measure on the test sample. different losses are coupled with 4 links derived from the following
The H measure is then set as the target variable, with the remaining standard distributions: logistic (i.e., Logit), positively skewed GEV,
variables serving as independent variables. Random forests are then symmetric EEL, and positively skewed EEL. As the Logit is an instance of
applied to identify important variables (Breiman, 2001). Random forests the symmetric EEL, we exclude pairing the hybrid loss with it. Addi-
are constructed using 1000 regression trees as base learners, and a tionally, we omit negatively skewed distributions since they are inap-
variable’s importance is determined by the average decrease in mean propriate for our classification task. Furthermore, we examine Xia et al.
square error (MSE) when an independent variable is used to split a node. (2017)’s cost-sensitive link paired with a CE loss, and extend it to be
Fig. 6(a) presents a regression tree within the random forest, and Fig. 6 compatible with the mfCE loss. In total, we explore a comprehensive set
(b) summarizes the importance of the variables.
8

=== PAGE 9 ===
J. Mushava and M. Murray E x p e r t S y s t e m s W i t h A p p l i c a t i o n s 238(2024)121876
Fig. 6. a) the standalone pruned regression tree provides an interpretable picture of how ir and the custom xgboost hyperparameters influence the discriminatory
power. the length of a branch is proportional to how much influence the split has on creating homogeneous groups; therefore, an ir of 98 is the most important factor
in separating the data. b) demonstrates that among the hyperparameters in Table 1, the following influence the discriminatory power the most: eta, Alpha,scale_-
pos_weight, Pi, Gamma1, max_depth, and the loss symmetry.
of 27 distinct XGBoost model configurations, each built upon these
Table 3
various loss-link function combinations.
Freddie Mac primary datasets. All datasets have 78 covariates.
Data Model development OOS Testing OOT Testing
6.1. Datasets
#Cases IR #Cases IR #Cases IR
We apply the models on datasets from our earlier study (Mushava & FM12 231 065 390 232 515 389 233 791 397
Murray, 2022): FM12, FM36, and FM60 datasets, which predict defaults FM36 159 199 163 158 784 165 606 616 113
in the next 12, 36 and 60 months, respectively. The datasets are also FM60 214 064 34 230 719 34 564 408 89
available on Mendeley Data (Mushava, 2023). As reported by Mushava
and Murray (2022), at least 90% of the positive cases in the FM datasets (Haixiang et al., 2017). Python modules, particularly “imblearn”,
are rare to outliers, whereas almost all of the negative cases are safe. “sklearn” and “keras” were used to implement these benchmarks and
Accordingly, default events can be viewed as rare events compared to our code for the ensembles. A brief overview of some prominent credit
non-default events. scoring techniques, grouped by how they handle class-imbalanced data
The pre-processing of the data included the identification of pre- follows (Dastile, Celik, & Potsane, 2020; Markov, Seleznyova, & Laps-
dictive and stable covariates, their standardization, missing values hin, 2022):
imputation, and one-hot encoding. XGBoost is non-parametric, so
dimension reduction techniques such as removing redundant or corre- 1. Data level techniques:
lated features were not performed. The credit score variable in FM a) re-balancing the data using the popular SMOTE before fitting the
datasets is uniquely capable of predicting defaults in a given outcome RF classifier,
window, as evidenced by its IV>>0.5 (Sousa, Gama, & Brand˜ao, 2016). b) further cleaning the data preprocessed using SMOTE with ENN
Therefore, the FM datasets used in this study correspond to loans with before fitting the RF classifier.
credit scores below a particular cut-off score to avoid having a one- 2. Algorithm level techniques:
dimensional model. Details of the model development, out-of-sample a) Cost-sensitive deep neural networks (CSDNN). Our model follows
(OOS) and out-of-time (OOT) primary datasets used in the application the deep learning set up by Kim et al. (2019). Instead, we use BO
are summarized in Table 3. and the model development sample to determine the optimal
class weight, learning rate, batch size, number of hidden layers
6.2. Benchmark classifiers (up to 5), neurons, activation function, and dropout rate. Notably,
we found during BO that a single hidden layer suffices to model
A comparison will also be made to other established classification our datasets.
techniques for handling class-imbalanced data in a two-class setting
9

=== PAGE 10 ===
J. Mushava and M. Murray E x p e r t S y s t e m s W i t h A p p l i c a t i o n s 238(2024)121876
b) Cost-sensitive support vector machine (CSSVM). Cao, Zhao, and each catering to various decision-making scenarios. Thus, our model
Zaiane (2013) describe the rationale of CSSVM for imbalanced evaluation will include assessing the accuracy and financial impact of
data learning. IR is used as a class-weight for the minority class, models with high discriminatory power when they are used for decision-
and 1 for the majority class. We experimented with both linear making based on a predetermined threshold score. Lastly, we will assess
and radial basis function (RBF) kernels. BO using the model our proposed XGBoost extensions for transparency. This is an essential
development sample led us to favour the linear kernel due to its requirement for stakeholders with less technical backgrounds, and a
computational efficiency and comparable performance to the RBF crucial regulatory requirement, particularly when scoring prospective
kernel on our datasets. borrowers.
3. Hybrid techniques:
a) Balanced RF (BRF) with 1000 trees (O’Brien & Ishwaran, 2019).
The fraction of predictors to be used in the tree base learners is 6.4. Results and discussion
tuned.
b) EasyEnsemble with AdaBoost as a base learner (Liu et al., 2008). A detailed discussion of the results is provided in the following
The number of samples to draw and the number of boosting it- subsections.
erations are tuned.
4. Heterogenous ensembles: 6.4.1. Discriminatory power
a) Stacking (Wolpert, 1992). From the techniques mentioned above
for addressing class-imbalanced data in the model, we have 6.4.1.1. Xgboost extensions. Fig. 7 displays boxplots representing the
chosen the following methods to construct a set of diverse base top 10 out of 27 XGBoost variants, ranked according to their median H
learners: 1b), 2a), and 3b). Additionally, we select one of the measure values. The values were derived from 30 model training and
XGBoost variants as a fourth base learner. We chose an XGBoost testing runs. To order model performance, the median was chosen
variant whose PDs have the highest IV during model training. The because it is unaffected by outliers or skewed distributions. An outlier in
BRF classifier is set as the meta-learner. performance is denoted by a filled dot, while the average performance is
b) Bstacking is a variation of stacking proposed by Xia, Liu, Da, and represented by a filled square. The horizontal dashed red lines within the
Xie (2018). The idea is to create independent samples for training boxplots represent the median of the standard XGBoost model. Addi-
the base learners and meta-classifiers, repeating this process T tionally, to distinguish the positively skewed EEL link from its sym-
times. Our stacking approach in 4a) is the special case, T = 1. We metric counterpart, a “+” suffix is used.
use the same set-up 4a) with T=40 for Bstacking. Each boxplot includes information about the class imbalance ratio
(IR) in the OOS and OOT test samples during the 30 runs, as well as the
6.3. Model evaluation p-value generated by Kruskal-Walli’s test. The assumptions of Kruskal-
Walli’s test, specifically the homogeneity of variance assumption, were
Due to the large size of our datasets, the following process is repeated violated when Levene’s test was applied. As a result, a significant p-
30 times: we start by randomly selecting 100 000 cases from the model value indicates that at least one model performs stochastically differ-
development dataset, and simultaneously, 50 000 cases from both the ently from the others, but does not necessarily indicate that the average
out-of-sample (OOS) and out-of-time (OOT) testing datasets. Next, we performance differs (Kruskal & Wallis, 1952). The Mann-Whitney U test,
divide the model development sample into two halves using random also known as the Wilcoxon rank-sum test, is used when we are
allocation (cid:0) 50% is dedicated to training, while the remaining 50% is attempting to determine whether the performance of two models is
assigned for validation purposes. After identifying the most suitable stochastically different.
hyperparameters, we proceed to fit the models using 50 000 cases from In the highly imbalanced FM12 OOS test dataset, among the variety
the training subset. In the case of both the CSDNN and XGBoost variants, of different loss functions and link pairs explored, the combination of the
the validation subset is utilized for implementing early stopping. Spe- UF loss and the EEL + link yielded the highest median H measure
cifically, if the H measure fails to exhibit improvement over the course of (0.1639), closely followed by the CE loss coupled with the Logit link
10 iterations using the validation set of 50 000 instances, the training (0.1635), as well as the UF1 loss coupled with the EEL link (0.1625).
process is halted. The final assessment of model performance is con- When extended to OOT test datasets, it becomes evident that the CE loss
ducted using an independent set of 50,000 cases from both the out-of- together with the Logit link demonstrates the strongest discriminatory
sample (OOS) and out-of-time (OOT) datasets. power, registering a median H value of 0.1266. It was followed by the UF
This iterative model evaluation approach, incorporating diverse loss with the EEL +link (0.1237) and the UF1 loss with the EEL link
training, validation, OOS, and OOT samples, is specifically designed to (0.1227). According to the Kruskal-Wallis test p-value, there are no
mitigate potential biases that might arise from a single hold-out vali- statistically significant differences between the top 10 specialized loss
dation strategy (García, Marqu´es, & Sa´nchez, 2015). Thus, we can draw and link function pairs for the FM12 OOS test sample. In OOT testing the
meaningful conclusions regarding the central tendency of the model FM12 datasets, Kruskal-Wallis’ test p-value indicates performance dif-
performance, ensuring statistically sound and reliable evaluations. In ferences. According to the Wilcoxon rank-sum test, with a p-value of
the OOT sample, loans are issued in a future period compared to the 0.6414, there is no statistically significant difference between the vanilla
model training sample, so it helps gauge the model’s robustness to the XGBoost and the enhancement utilizing UF loss and the EEL +link.
time change. In the FM36 datasets with less severe class imbalances, Kruskal-
We will also evaluate the discriminatory power of the models using Wallis’ test indicates statistically significant differences in performance
the Gini index, which is a standard measure in the credit industry among the top 10 XGBoost extensions across both the OOS and OOT
(Siddiqi, 2012). In binary classification tasks, discriminatory power re- datasets. Particularly noteworthy is the superiority of the UF-EEL +and
fers to a model’s ability to rank-order positive and negative cases using a UF1-EEL loss-link pairs, with OOS median H values of 16.86% and
numeric score, typically a probability prediction. The advantage of using 16.76%, respectively, in contrast to vanilla XGBoost’s median perfor-
the H measure and Gini index is that they are independent of a subject- mance of 16.65%. This trend is similarly pronounced in OOT testing,
based cut-off score for classifying a case. In both the Gini index and the H where the UF-EEL +and UF1-EEL loss-link pairs secure median H values
measure, the values range from 0 to 1.0, with higher values indicating of 12% and 11.97%, outperforming vanilla XGBoost’s fifth-ranked me-
greater discriminatory power. dian H of 11.67%. Observing the FM36 OOT boxplots, it is evident that
In practical applications, credit-scoring models play a pivotal role by the UF-EEL + loss-link function pair achieved a substantially higher
generating scores that are subsequently divided into distinct ranges, maximum H value (15.8%) compared to the vanilla XGBoost solution
10

=== PAGE 11 ===
J. Mushava and M. Murray E x p e r t S y s t e m s W i t h A p p l i c a t i o n s 238(2024)121876
Fig. 7. Comparing the discriminatory power of the XGBoost extensions using the H measure.
(14.5%). Wilcoxon rank-sum test, p-value = 0.2618, detected no sta- hyperparameter. Our analysis of hyperparameter optimization out-
tistically significant difference between vanilla XGBoost and the tailored comes, as detailed in the supplementary material, aligns with the find-
XGBoost using UF loss and EEL +link. ings of (Calabrese et al., 2016). In their exploration of the incorporation
Under conditions of extreme class imbalance within the FM12 of a GEV link within a generalized additive model (GAM) and in the
datasets, the use of the UF-EEL +and UF1-EEL loss-link pairs did not context of non-severely class-imbalanced data, Calabrese et al. (2016)
provide any noticeable advantage in terms of discriminatory power determined that τ=(cid:0) 0.25 yielded optimal empirical results. Conse-
when considering median performance. However, their performance quently, the need for extensive hyperparameter optimization specif-
within the context of FM36 datasets has revealed promising outcomes ically for the GEV link appears to be unwarranted.
for datasets characterized by a high imbalance ratio (IR). An intriguing Interestingly, the cost-sensitive XGBoost (CSXGBoost) framework
finding emerges when scrutinizing the highest H values achieved on the proposed by Xia et al. (2017) did not appear among the top 10 XGBoost
FM12 OOS test samples. In this case, the mfCE-EEEL + pair ranked variants. In our new extension, we used the CE loss with a focal
fourth in terms of median performance, achieving an exceptional H- parameter in CSXGBoost, represented by the fCE-CS loss-link pair, to
value of 24.3%, notably surpassing XGBoost’s highest H-value of 21.5%. achieve the 7th rank in OOT testing on the FM36 dataset. The propo-
Despite XGBoost’s median dominance on the FM12 OOS test samples, it sition of Wang et al. (2020) that incorporates weighted CE (wCE) or
shares equivalent high H-values with the UF-EEL +and UF1-EEL loss- standard focal loss (fCE) intermittently appears within the top 10
link pairs. Fig. 7 reinforces this trend, illustrating that the custom ex- rankings but is not ranked highly. Also, the extension developed by
tensions consistently achieve higher or competitive H-values in com- Trisanto et al. (2021), which utilizes the modified focal loss (mfCE)
parison to XGBoost. We posit that with meticulous refinement, the alongside the Logit link in XGBoost, only obtained the 9th position on
advanced loss functions introduced in this study hold the potential to the FM36 dataset during OOT testing. The combination of mfCE loss and
outperform XGBoost’s CE loss, which lacks tunability. This assertion is the GEV link, which was introduced earlier (Mushava & Murray, 2022),
grounded in the fact that no further hyperparameter tuning was pursued performed well in the special loss function case of adopting CE or wCE
beyond the initial Bayesian optimization stage, which employed coarse loss. A possible explanation for the difference between this study and the
search ranges as detailed in Table 1. aforementioned related works is the reliance on single hold-out valida-
In scenarios where the class imbalance is less severe (IR<99), such tion. Holdout estimators are often biased since only a portion of the data
as in the FM60 dataset, the Kruskal-Wallis test did not detect perfor- is used for training and validation (García et al., 2015). We recommend
mance differences for the top 10 models, both in OOS and OOT contexts. repeating model training and validation procedures multiple times, or
Nevertheless, we observed that simpler loss functions, like the classic adopting cross-validation techniques in the case of smaller datasets, in
CE, were sufficient. Specifically, coupling CE with the positively skewed order to mitigate the bias.
GEV link consistently demonstrated favourable performance in both In conclusion, our empirical findings present a noteworthy obser-
OOS and OOT scenarios. On OOT testing, the average performance of vation. When considering the incorporation of asymmetric loss functions
the CE-GEV loss-link pair at 17.49%, noticeably surpassed that of vanilla to address the class imbalance, it becomes apparent that assigning the
XGBoost at 17.02%. Based on the observed outcomes, we find that focal parameter exclusively to the rare class could potentially yield su-
customizing XGBoost with a GEV link offers a parsimonious alternative perior outcomes compared to the alternative approach proposed by Li
to the commonly used Logit link, as it introduces just a single additional et al. (2019) of applying the focal parameter solely to the majority class.
11

=== PAGE 12 ===
J. Mushava and M. Murray E x p e r t S y s t e m s W i t h A p p l i c a t i o n s 238(2024)121876
This distinction becomes particularly pronounced when contrasting the heterogeneous ensembles. This superiority is affirmed across both the H
performance of the UF1 loss formulation, introduced in our study, with measure and the Gini index, spanning both out-of-sample (OOS) and
the asymmetric UF0 loss proposed by Yeung et al. (2022) within the out-of-time (OOT) datasets. Nonetheless, XGBoost_CE_GEV required on
realm of computer vision applications. The next section compares the average 50% more training time than the conventional XGBoost model.
discriminatory power of the top-performing XGBoost extensions to the When dealing with severe class imbalances, as observed in the FM12
benchmark classifiers discussed in Section 6.2. and FM36 datasets, the hybrid EasyEnsemble classifier demonstrates
superior performance to other classifiers. EasyEnsemble selects all in-
6.4.1.2. Comparison to benchmark classifiers. We compare XGBoost’s stances from the minority class and combines them with the same
discriminatory power and its top-performing customizations with the number of cases randomly selected from the majority class. The process
benchmarks discussed in Section 6.2. XGBoost enhancements that is repeated multiple times to generate a range of balanced training
employ UF-EEL + and UF1-EEL loss-link pairs will henceforth be samples. Based on these balanced sample subsets, a base learner, in this
referred to as XGBoost_UF_EEL + and XGBoost_UF1_EEL. These two case, AdaBoost, is trained, and its predictions are aggregated. In com-
customizations were selected for their robust performance on datasets in plex classification tasks with severe class imbalances, algorithmic ap-
which there is a severe class imbalance (IR≥99). On the other hand, for proaches are frequently incorporated into multi-classifier systems, such
datasets with non-severe class imbalance (IR<99), we select the variant as EasyEnsemble. XGBoost and its extensions implement more complex
of XGBoost incorporating the GEV link into the CE loss, referred to as boosting algorithms than AdaBoost and demonstrate quicker training
XGBoost_CE_GEV. The Gini index is also shown, which is the credit times. Consequently, the techniques proposed in this study can replace
industry’s standard for measuring a model’s discriminatory power. We AdaBoost in the EasyEnsemble framework to improve the XGBoost
use the median as a measure of central tendency to mitigate the influ- variant’s predictive capacity in severe class imbalances, where
ence of outliers or skewed performance. In addition, the median model algorithm-level adjustments were less effective than hybrid classifiers.
training time across all datasets is presented. Classifiers demonstrating The performance of the model was the worst when data pre-
the best performance are highlighted in bold text, while those demon- processing techniques were applied. In addition, heterogeneous
strating the best performance in their respective categories, including ensemble classifiers such as Bstacking require significant computational
algorithm-level, data-level, hybrid, and ensemble classifiers, are resources. Also of note is that the Gini index and H measure consistently
underlined. rank models according to their discriminatory power. An empirical
Table 4 illustrates that the novel extensions introduced in this study, study by Lessmann, Baesens, Seow, and Thomas (2015) found a 93%
which could be further refined to enhance their discriminatory power, correlation between the area under the receiver operating characteristic
show a notable advantage over the baseline XGBoost algorithm on curve (AUC) and the H measure. The AUC is proportional to the Gini
average. In cases of non-severe class imbalance, the XGBoost_CE_GEV index: AUC =1/2(Gini +1). The next section examines the relationship
variant performs significantly better than established benchmark clas- between discriminatory power, and classification accuracy, which is
sifiers, such as neural networks and SVMs, and sophisticated related to profitability.
Table 4
Benchmarking XGBoost and its top-performing extensions to selected data-level, hybrid methods, and ensemble methods for handling class imbalanced data. Values
shown are median (in per cent) performance across 30 validation runs.
Metric Classifier FM12 FM36 FM60 Runtime
OOS OOT OOS OOT OOS OOT (sec)
Algorithm-level:
H XGBoost 16.35 12.66 16.65 11.67 21.46 17.46 4.40
XGBoost_CE_GEV 0.00 0.00 9.54 7.68 21.62 17.51 6.99
XGBoost_UF_EEL+ 16.39 12.37 16.86 12.00 21.37 16.78 10.10
XGBoost_UF1_EEL 16.25 12.27 16.76 11.97 21.25 16.79 11.25
CSDNN 13.40 5.04 14.60 11.30 20.70 17.10 39.10
CSSVM 13.40 5.04 14.60 11.30 20.90 17.30 37.80
Data-level:
SMOTE_RF 6.50 3.56 6.89 5.94 11.62 7.98 105
SMOTE_ENN_RF 6.04 4.30 6.80 2.75 12.70 4.24 117
Hybrid:
BRF 19.57 11.63 18.18 11.95 19.74 10.85 15.5
EasyEnsemble 21.8 13.94 20.05 14.50 18.88 10.39 4.6
Heterogeneous ensembles:
Stacking 10.88 8.31 14.14 9.89 14.92 7.78 444
Bstacking* 19.99 9.78 17.66 12.13 18.09 13.02 18 998
Algorithm-level:
Gini XGBoost 45.87 40.09 46.57 40.37 54.20 48.00 4.40
XGBoost_CE_GEV 45.81 39.85 47.04 40.46 54.25 47.35 6.99
XGBoost_UF_EEL+ 0.00 0.00 27.65 25.63 54.44 48.04 10.10
XGBoost_UF1_EEL 45.49 39.59 46.98 40.67 54.05 47.60 11.25
CSDNN 36.80 18.20 42.50 39.10 52.40 47.40 39.10
CSSVM 36.80 18.20 42.50 39.10 53.10 47.70 37.80
Data-level:
SMOTE_RF 22.1 17.0 28.0 27.1 39.7 33.2 105
SMOTE_ENN_RF 23.1 21.1 30.1 16.8 43.0 23.1 117
Hybrid:
BRF 49.7 37.5 50.0 41.7 52.2 40.0 15.5
EasyEnsemble 50.7 40.7 51.4 44.6 51.3 35.2 4.6
Heterogeneous ensembles:
Stacking 35.3 31.8 41.8 38.1 45.5 33.6 444
Bstacking 47.2 34.3 48.7 41.9 50.3 42.6 18 998
*Model training and testing repeated only 5 times due to intensive computational time.
12

=== PAGE 13 ===
J. Mushava and M. Murray E x p e r t S y s t e m s W i t h A p p l i c a t i o n s 238(2024)121876
6.4.2. Classification accuracy and profitability 2017). The results indicate that there is no single model that is suitable
To gauge the potential business value of employing scorecards with for all performance metrics and performs optimally across them.
higher discriminatory power, we examine classification accuracy and Across all datasets, XGBoost and its variants exhibit the highest MCC
related misclassification costs. For each FM dataset, we select XGBoost and F1 values. The FPRs, however, are lower due to poor predictions for
and its most effective variant, as well as the most effective algorithm- the negative cases compared to the benchmarks. In contrast, XGBoost
based, data-based, and hybrid benchmarks. We pursue the same model and its variants have relatively low FNRs due to their higher classifica-
evaluation strategy outlined in Section 6.3, but we use the 50 000 cases tion accuracy on positive cases. Low FNRs have significant implications
from the OOS test data to determine a cut-off score c that maintains the for financial applications such as credit scoring since misclassifying
training sample default rate. A case in the OOT test data, which more positive cases is a serious error. As an example, denying credit to a
closely resembles real-life data, is classified as positive (y = 1) if the potentially good client, although regrettable, is more manageable given
model-predicted probability is greater than c, otherwise classified as the larger number of potential borrowers. In contrast, extending credit
negative (y =0). to a high-risk customer results in considerable financial losses. Bench-
From the confusion matrix, we calculate the following metrics: false mark classifiers are therefore susceptible to low FPR errors but incur
positive rate (FPR), false negative rate (FNR), Matthew’s correlation substantial misclassification costs due to high FNR errors.
coefficient (MCC), and F1 score. The FPR is the percentage of positive To determine whether the FNRs of the top two classifiers are statis-
cases misclassified as negative by the model. In contrast, the FNR is the tically significant, we conducted a Wilcoxon rank-sum test. There were
fraction of positive cases that are incorrectly classified as negative by the no statistically significant differences in the FNRs of XGBoost and
model. The F1 score, which is equivalent to the Dice score in equation XGBoost_UF_EEL +in cases where the IR exceeded 99, namely FM12 (p-
(16), ranges from 0 to 1, with 1 indicating the accurate classification of value =0.4765) and FM36 (p-value =0.2559). A significant statistical
all positive cases. F1 scores, however, ignore the correct classification of difference was observed between the FNRs of XGBoost and XGBoost_-
negative cases. The MCC, whose values range from (cid:0) 1 to 1, provides an CE_GEV in the FM60 datasets, with a p-value of 0.0166. Furthermore,
unbiased measure of classification accuracy of both classes when the XGBoost_CE_GEV has a superior discriminatory power when the IR is
datasets have a significant class imbalance (Chicco & Jurman, 2020). An lower than 99, implying that its implementation is likely to result in a
MCC of zero represents the expected value of a coin toss, whereas (cid:0) 1 tangible financial benefit.
and 1 indicate perfect misclassification and classification, respectively.
To assess whether more accurate models are profitable, we examine 6.4.3. Model transparency
misclassification costs, as done by Lessmann et al. (2015). Credit scoring The use of machine-learning models has gained increasing interest
is characterized by the low opportunity cost of incorrectly classifying among banks in recent years (Dastile et al., 2020). However, advanced
negative cases as positives, that is, the FPR error, as opposed to the cost machine learning techniques present a significant challenge because of
or loss of incorrectly classifying a positive case as negative. In the first their inherent “black box” nature, which makes it difficult to understand
12 months, which is the target of the FM12 dataset, we assume the ratio how predictions are generated. For banks, credit providers, and other
will be 1:5, and on a longer scale, such as FM36 and FM60, we assume institutions that prioritize accurate predictions, while seeking insight
the ratio will be 1:10. The results of the analysis are presented in Table 5. into their inner workings, this concern is particularly pressing (Haixiang
Table 5 shows the MCC does not apply to the benchmark classifiers in et al., 2017). Moreover, many countries impose regulatory stipulations
the FM12 datasets. This is because the models classify all positive cases demanding interpretability in credit scoring models, particularly for
as negative. Consequently, a zero F1 score is reported. Despite Easy- assessing new credit applications.
Ensemble’s robust discriminatory power, it could not detect positive GBDT techniques such as XGBoost rely on intuitive decision trees as
cases in OOT samples. Poor calibration may be responsible for this base models, which can readily be extracted and interpreted. Based on
problem, namely, predictions are not accurately aligned with observed our hyperparameter optimization, we determined that shallow decision
outcomes. There is no correlation between calibration and discrimina- tree base learners are optimal, which makes it easier to interpret the
tory power, and further post-processing is often required to align pre- trees. Fig. 8 illustrates a representative base tree learner from
dictions with actual outcomes (Bequ´e, Coussement, Gayler, & Lessmann, XGBoost_CE_GEV, demonstrating its interpretability. Based on this base
tree, a client with a credit score below 678.5 and more than one obli-
gating borrower for the mortgage (indicated by Single_borrower = 0)
Table 5
Median performance of selected models in terms of classification accuracy across receives a score of (cid:0) 0.0058. To determine the probability of default, the
30 runs. Except for the misclassification costs, the values shown are percentages. component decision tree base model scores are summed up and fed into
Dataset/ Classifier Performance metric
MCC F1 FPR FNR Cost*
FM12
XGBoost 0.90 1.10 0.97 97.83 4.9012
XGBoost_UF_EEL+ 0.74 0.97 0.44 98.49 4.9288
CSDNN n/a 0.00 0.20 100.00 5.0020
EasyEnsemble n/a 0.00 0.07 100.00 5.0007
SMOTE_ENN_RF n/a 0.00 0.11 100.00 5.0011
FM36
XGBoost 10.1 5.12 1.97 90.94 9.1150
XGBoost_UF_EEL+ 8.48 5.20 2.22 90.77 9.0984
CSDNN 1.13 1.10 0.17 99.33 9.9347
EasyEnsemble 2.77 2.94 0.30 99.98 9.9984
SMOTE_ENN_RF (cid:0) 0.05 0.04 0.03 99.98 9.9984
FM60
XGBoost 6.62 5.99 7.67 75.85 7.6620
XGBoost_CE_GEV 6.04 5.27 10.73 70.95 7.2023
CSSVM 2.52 3.66 2.00 94.57 9.4768
BRF 2.52 3.66 2.00 94.57 9.4768
Fig. 8. An extract of the first decision tree-based learner based on the
SMOTE_RF 1.10 2.22 1.23 97.61 9.7737
XGBOOST_CE_GEV variant from the FM60 dataset. The cover is the sum of
*Assuming it costs 5 times to misclassify positive cases in the first year, and 10 Hessian, representing how many cases fall into that node. Gain is the infor-
times afterwards. mation gain (8) for the split, representing the importance of the variable.
13

=== PAGE 14 ===
J. Mushava and M. Murray E x p e r t S y s t e m s W i t h A p p l i c a t i o n s 238(2024)121876
the link function. can be symmetric or asymmetric. For the link functions in the losses,
As the number of decision trees in baseline models increases, there are two options: either one drawn from the generalized extreme
analyzing each component tree becomes increasingly challenging. To value (GEV) distribution or an exponential logistic (EEL) distribution.
address this issue, the baseline implementation of XGBoost incorporates We examined 27 competing XGBoost variants and applied them to a
contemporary techniques such as SHAP (Shapley Additive Explana- publicly available Freddie Mac mortgage loan database.
tions). The SHAP method can be used to assess the contributions of each The novel extensions introduced in this study demonstrate a notable
feature to predictions (Lundberg & Lee, 2017). Fig. 9 shows the SHAP advantage over the baseline XGBoost algorithm. When the class-
values of the six most influential predictors in the XGBoost_CE_GEV imbalance ratio (IR) is not severe, usually less than 99, cross-entropy
variant when applied to FM60 training data. Positive SHAP values loss paired with a link derived from a standard GEV distribution per-
indicate a higher likelihood of default, while negative values indicate formed significantly better than established benchmark classifiers, such
the opposite. A credit score, for example, has a nonlinear relationship as neural networks, support vector machines, and sophisticated het-
with default, where in general, the higher a credit score, the lower the erogeneous classifiers. In the case of severe class imbalances, typically
default rate. Blue markings indicate that other factors are influencing IRs between 99 and 200, the more advanced loss function that combines
the predictions at that point. Based on the dummy 0/1 variable for a the symmetric loss function with a link derived from a positively skewed
single borrower, it is evident that a higher default rate is associated with standard EEL distribution performs materially better than the vanilla
loans with only one borrower liable to repay the mortgage, as opposed to XGBoost. Across both out-of-sample and out-of-time datasets, the pro-
loans with more guarantors. Other variables in Fig. 9 also exhibit logical posed extensions demonstrated superiority both for the H measure and
trends and can be interpreted similarly. Our prior study provides a the Gini index. In extreme class imbalance ratios, usually greater than
comprehensive description of the predictor variables (Mushava & 300, we did not find a clear advantage to using a more advanced loss
Murray, 2022). function. Because of the hybrid loss function’s flexibility, we expect it to
perform better at extreme levels of class imbalance with fine-tuning.
7. Conclusions, limitations and future research Finally, we have found that the proposed extensions decrease the
misclassification costs associated with incorrectly classifying positive
7.1. Conclusions cases as negative when the class imbalance is not severe, which has a
financial benefit for credit scoring. Furthermore, GBDTs such as
This paper presents a novel flexible loss function for binary classifi- XGBoost are relatively transparent in comparison to other machine
cation based on the popular XGBoost implementation of gradient- learning techniques, which is desirable for financial applications. Our
boosted decision trees (GBDT). This loss function can specify Dice- working code and model output are publicly available on our Github
based and cross-entropy-based loss functions, and their hybrids, and repository to facilitate reproducibility and extensibility.
Fig. 9. The contribution of the top 6 predictors towards the target prediction in the XGBOOST_CE_GEV variant in the FM60 training dataset.
14

=== PAGE 15 ===
J. Mushava and M. Murray E x p e r t S y s t e m s W i t h A p p l i c a t i o n s 238(2024)121876
7.2. Limitations References
Our study has limitations, primarily due to data resampling and Abraham, N., & Khan, N. M. (2019). A novel focal tversky loss function with improved
attention u-net for lesion segmentation. Paper presented at the 2019 IEEE 16th
hyperparameter optimization. To expedite computational processes and
international symposium on biomedical imaging (ISBI 2019).
mitigate random effects, we selected 50,000 cases each for model Alzaatreh, A., Lee, C., & Famoye, F. (2013). A new method for generating families of
development, validation, out-of-sample testing, and out-of-time testing, continuous distributions. Metron, 71(1), 63–79.
Batista, G. E., Bazzan, A. L., & Monard, M. C. (2003). Balancing training data for automated
and repeated the process 30 times. In the case of hyperparameter opti-
annotation of keywords: a case study. Paper presented at the WOB.
misation, we repeated the process five times over course search ranges. Bequ´e, A., Coussement, K., Gayler, R., & Lessmann, S. (2017). Approaches for credit
While increasing efficiency, this pragmatic approach raises questions scorecard calibration: An empirical analysis. Knowledge-Based Systems, 134,
213–227.
regarding the representativeness of the samples and hyperparameters.
Bergstra, J., Komer, B., Eliasmith, C., Yamins, D., & Cox, D. D. (2015). Hyperopt: A
Sample sizes and repetitions can be increased for more robust results. python library for model selection and hyperparameter optimization. Computational
Another option would be to examine other data resampling techniques Science & Discovery, 8(1), Article 014008.
such as cross-validation and bootstrapping. When the class-imbalance Breiman, L. (2001). Random forests. Machine Learning, 45(1), 5–32.
Breiman, L., Friedman, J., Olshen, R., & Stone, C. (1984). Classification and Regression
ratio was extreme, we did not find any noticeable benefit from the Trees.
advanced loss function. Considering that our proposed advanced loss Calabrese, R., Marra, G., & Angela Osmetti, S. (2016). Bankruptcy prediction of small and
functions include other established loss functions as special cases, fine- medium enterprises using a flexible binary generalized extreme value model. Journal
of the operational research society, 67(4), 604–615.
tuning the hyperparameter search range should assist in achieving at Cao, P., Zhao, D., & Zaiane, O. (2013). An optimized cost-sensitive SVM for imbalanced data
least the same performance as the base models. learning. Paper presented at the Pacific-Asia conference on knowledge discovery and
Our method of central tendency assessment relies on the median, and data mining.
Chen, T., & Guestrin, C. (2016). Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. Paper presented
we use out-of-time testing. Thus, any outliers, skews, or over-optimistic
at the Proceedings of the 22nd acm sigkdd international conference on knowledge
results should not significantly influence our conclusions. Furthermore, discovery and data mining.
to ascertain the significance of performance disparities, we incorporated Chen, M.-H., Dey, D. K., & Shao, Q.-M. (1999). A new skewed link model for
consistent statistical tests into our analysis. As a result of this study’s dichotomous quantal response data. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 94
(448), 1172–1186.
model evaluation approach, the validity of our findings is enhanced. Chicco, D., & Jurman, G. (2020). The advantages of the Matthews correlation coefficient
(MCC) over F1 score and accuracy in binary classification evaluation. BMC Genomics,
21(1), 1–13.
7.3. Future research
Cohen, S., Dagan, N., Cohen-Inger, N., Ofer, D., & Rokach, L. (2021). ICU survival
prediction incorporating test-time augmentation to improve the accuracy of
Our future research endeavours will extend the scope of this study by ensemble-based models. IEEE Access, 9, 91584–91592.
exploring a variety of avenues, including: Coles, S., Bawa, J., Trenner, L., & Dorazio, P. (2001). An introduction to statistical modeling
of extreme values (Vol. 208). Springer.
Dastile, X., Celik, T., & Potsane, M. (2020). Statistical and machine learning models in
• Enhancing class-imbalanced data modelling: we intend to integrate credit scoring: A systematic literature survey. Applied Soft Computing, 91, Article
GBDT models with advanced loss functions within hybrid classifiers, 106263.
Deotte, C., Liu, B., Schifferer, B., & Titericz, G. (2021). GPU accelerated boosted trees and
such as EasyEnsemble, as well as heterogeneous ensemble classifiers. deep neural networks for better recommender systems. In: RecSysChallenge’21:
• Broadening the application of advanced loss functions: we also Proceedings of the Recommender Systems Challenge 2021 (pp. 7–14).
intend to investigate the applicability of advanced loss functions in Dorogush, A. V., Ershov, V., & Gulin, A. (2018). CatBoost: gradient boosting with
categorical features support. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.11363.
diverse machine learning methodologies such as artificial neural Fern´andez, A., Garcia, S., Herrera, F., & Chawla, N. V. (2018). SMOTE for learning from
networks, contemporary data augmentation techniques such as imbalanced data: Progress and challenges, marking the 15-year anniversary. Journal
GANs, as well as other GBDT implementations such as LightGBM. of Artificial Intelligence Research, 61, 863–905.
• Targeting diverse performance metrics: instead of focusing solely on Fried Am nna an l,
s
J o.
f
H S.
t
a( t2 is0 t0 ic1 s,) .
1
G 1r 8e 9e –d 1y
2
f 3u 2n
.
ction approximation: A gradient boosting machine.
optimizing discrimination power, our future research will explore García, V., Marqu´es, A. I., & S´anchez, J. S. (2015). An insight into the experimental
alternative performance metrics such as accuracy and/or design for credit risk and corporate bankruptcy prediction systems. Journal of
Intelligent Information Systems, 44(1), 159–189.
profitability. García, V., Marqu´es, A. I., & S´anchez, J. S. (2019). Exploring the synergetic effects of
• Evaluating effectiveness in different scenarios: not limited to credit sample types on the performance of ensembles for credit risk and corporate
scoring, we also intend to apply the advanced loss functions to bankruptcy prediction. Information Fusion, 47, 88–101.
complex datasets with small disjuncts, overlapping classes, mixed Ghosh, I., & Alzaatreh, A. (2018). A new class of generalized logistic distribution.
Communications in Statistics-Theory and Methods, 47(9), 2043–2055.
types of predictors, and multi-class targets. Haixiang, G., Yijing, L., Shang, J., Mingyun, G., Yuanyue, H., & Bing, G. (2017). Learning
from class-imbalanced data: Review of methods and applications. Expert Systems with
We hope that by focusing our future research in these directions, we Applications, 73, 220–239.
Hand, D. J. (2009). Measuring classifier performance: A coherent alternative to the area
will be able to theoretically and practically improve the use of advanced under the ROC curve. Machine Learning, 77(1), 103–123.
loss functions in machine learning. Hand, D. J., & Anagnostopoulos, C. (2014). A better Beta for the H measure of
classification performance. Pattern Recognition Letters, 40, 41–46.
Jadon, S. (2020). A survey of loss functions for semantic segmentation. Paper presented at
Declaration of Competing Interest
the 2020 IEEE Conference on Computational Intelligence in Bioinformatics and
Computational Biology (CIBCB).
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial Ke, G., Meng, Q., Finley, T., Wang, T., Chen, W., Ma, W., … Liu, T.-Y. (2017). Lightgbm:
A highly efficient gradient boosting decision tree. Advances in Neural Information
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
Processing Systems, 30.
the work reported in this paper. Kim, E., Lee, J., Shin, H., Yang, H., Cho, S., Nam, S.-K., … Kim, J.-I. (2019). Champion-
challenger analysis for credit card fraud detection: Hybrid ensemble and deep
learning. Expert Systems with Applications, 128, 214–224.
Data availability
Kotz, S., & Nadarajah, S. (2000). Extreme value distributions: Theory and applications.
World Scientific.
The manuscript provides information on how to access supporting Krawczyk, B. (2016). Learning from imbalanced data: Open challenges and future
directions. Progress in Artificial Intelligence, 5(4), 221–232.
data and code.
Kruskal, W. H., & Wallis, W. A. (1952). Use of ranks in one-criterion variance analysis.
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 47(260), 583–621.
Appendix A. Supplementary material Lessmann, S., Baesens, B., Seow, H.-V., & Thomas, L. C. (2015). Benchmarking state-of-
the-art classification algorithms for credit scoring: An update of research. European
Journal of Operational Research, 247(1), 124–136.
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.eswa.2023.121876.
15

=== PAGE 16 ===
J. Mushava and M. Murray E x p e r t S y s t e m s W i t h A p p l i c a t i o n s 238(2024)121876
Li, Z., Kamnitsas, K., & Glocker, B. (2019). Overfitting of neural nets under class imbalance: Schifferer, B., Titericz, G., Deotte, C., Henkel, C., Onodera, K., Liu, J., … Erdem, A.
Analysis and improvements for segmentation. Paper presented at the International (2020). GPU accelerated feature engineering and training for recommender systems.
Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention. In: Proceedings of the recommender systems challenge 2020 (pp. 16–23).
Lin, T.-Y., Goyal, P., Girshick, R., He, K., & Dolla´r, P. (2017). Focal loss for dense object Siddiqi, N. (2012). Credit risk scorecards: developing and implementing intelligent credit
detection. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on scoring, 3. John Wiley & Sons.
computer vision. Snoek, J., Larochelle, H., & Adams, R. P. (2012). Practical bayesian optimization of
Liu, X.-Y., Wu, J., & Zhou, Z.-H. (2008). Exploratory undersampling for class-imbalance machine learning algorithms. Paper presented at the Advances in neural information
learning. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B (Cybernetics), 39 processing systems.
(2), 539–550. Sousa, M. R., Gama, J., & Branda˜o, E. (2016). Dynamic credit score modeling with short-
Lundberg, S. M., & Lee, S.-I. (2017). A unified approach to interpreting model term and long-term memories: the case of Freddie Mac’s database.
predictions. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30. Trisanto, D., Rismawati, N., Mulya, M. F., & Kurniadi, F. I. (2021). Modified focal loss in
Markov, A., Seleznyova, Z., & Lapshin, V. (2022). Credit scoring methods: Latest trends imbalanced XGBoost for credit card fraud detection. International Journal of Intelligent
and points to consider. The Journal of Finance and Data Science. Engineering & Systems.
Murphy, K. P. (2012). Machine learning: A probabilistic perspective: MIT press. Wang, C., Deng, C., & Wang, S. (2020). Imbalance-XGBoost: Leveraging weighted and
Mushava, J., & Murray, M. (2022). A novel XGBoost extension for credit scoring class- focal losses for binary label-imbalanced classification with XGBoost. Pattern
imbalanced data combining a generalized extreme value link and a modified focal Recognition Letters, 136, 190–197.
loss function. Expert Systems with Applications, 202, Article 117233. Wolpert, D. H. (1992). Stacked generalization. Neural Networks, 5(2), 241–259.
Mushava, J. (2023). Credit scoring with class imbalance data: An out-of-sample and out-of- Wu, F., Liu, Y., Gazo, R., Bedrich, B., & Qu, X. (2022). Some Practice for Improving the
time perspective. Available from https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/bzr2rxttvz. Search Results of E-commerce. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.00108.
O’Brien, R., & Ishwaran, H. (2019). A random forests quantile classifier for class Xia, Y., Liu, C., Da, B., & Xie, F. (2018). A novel heterogeneous ensemble credit scoring
imbalanced data. Pattern Recognition, 90, 232–249. model based on bstacking approach. Expert Systems with Applications, 93, 182–199.
Owen, S. (2021). How (Not) to Tune Your Model With Hyperopt. Available from https:// Xia, Y., Liu, C., Li, Y., & Liu, N. (2017). A boosted decision tree approach using Bayesian
www.databricks.com/blog/2021/04/15/how-not-to-tune-your-model-with- hyper-parameter optimization for credit scoring. Expert Systems with Applications, 78,
hyperopt.html#:~:text=However%2C%20Hyperopt’s%20tuning%20process%20is, 225–241.
of%20trials%2C%20is%20also%2032. Xia, Y., Liu, C., & Liu, N. (2017). Cost-sensitive boosted tree for loan evaluation in peer-
Prasetyo, R. B., Kuswanto, H., Iriawan, N., & Ulama, B. S. S. (2020). Binomial regression to-peer lending. Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 24, 30–49.
models with a flexible generalized logit link function. Symmetry, 12(2), 221. Yang, Q., & Wu, X. (2006). 10 challenging problems in data mining research.
Salehi, S. S. M., Erdogmus, D., & Gholipour, A. (2017). Tversky loss function for image International Journal of Information Technology & Decision Making, 5(04), 597–604.
segmentation using 3D fully convolutional deep networks. Paper presented at the Yeung, M., Sala, E., Scho¨nlieb, C.-B., & Rundo, L. (2022). Unified Focal loss: Generalising
International workshop on machine learning in medical imaging. Dice and cross entropy-based losses to handle class imbalanced medical image
Sampath, V., Maurtua, I., Aguilar Martin, J. J., & Gutierrez, A. (2021). A survey on segmentation. Computerized Medical Imaging and Graphics, 95, Article 102026.
generative adversarial networks for imbalance problems in computer vision tasks. Zhang, P., Zheng, L., Yan, R., Li, C., Hu, R., Zhou, S., … Liu, Q. (2022). Multiclass Product
Journal of Big Data, 8, 1–59. Classification Based On Multilingual Model and LightGBM (Team: Uni).
Schapire, R. E. (1999). A brief introduction to boosting. Paper presented at the Ijcai. Zhou, X., Yao, C., Wen, H., Wang, Y., Zhou, S., He, W., & Liang, J. (2017). EAST: an
efficient and accurate scene text detector. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
16
